evaṃ caturdaśajaganmayatāṃ gatasya
pātālamīśa tava pādatalaṃ vadanti |
pādordhvadeśamapi deva rasātalaṃ te
gulphadvayaṃ khalu mahātalamadbhutātman ||1||
evaṃ	in this manner
caturdaśa-jagat-mayatāṃ gatasya	(of Thee) who had manifested as the fourteen worlds
pātālam-	Paataal
īśa	O Lord!
tava pādatalaṃ	soles (lower part) of Thy feet
vadanti	is said to be
pāda-ūrdhva-deśam-api	the upper surface of (Thy) feet
deva	O Effulgent One!
rasātalaṃ	(is) Rasaatala
te gulphadvayaṃ khalu	Thy two ankles, indeed
mahātalam-	(are) Mahaatala
adbhut-ātman	O Lord of wondrous form
O Lord! Thou took the wonderful form of the fourteen worlds as Thy Viraat Swaroopa : The lower worlds - Paataala -is the lower portion of Thy feet. Rasaatala - is the upper portion of Thy feet. Mahaatala is Thy two ankles.
jaṅghe talātalamatho sutalaṃ ca jānū
kiñcorubhāgayugalaṃ vitalātale dve |
kṣoṇītalaṃ jaghanamambaramaṅga nābhi-
rvakṣaśca śakranilayastava cakrapāṇe ||2||
jaṅghe talātalam-	(Thy) shins Talaatal
atha: sutalaṃ ca jānū	then, Sutala (are Thy) knees
kiñca-uru-bhāga-yugalaṃ	moreover, the two thighs (are)
vitala-atale dve	the two (worlds) Vitala and Atala
kṣoṇītalaṃ jaghanam-	the earth is (Thy) hip
ambaram-aṅga nābhi: -	sky is O Lord! the navel
vakṣa: - ca	and the chest
śakra-nilaya: tava	of Thine is the abode of Indra (swarga)
cakrapāṇe	O Wielder of the discus!
O Wielder of the discus! Talaatala is Thy shins (lower part of leg between knee and ankle). Sutala is Thy knees. Vitala and Atala are the two thighs. The higher worlds: Bhoomi (earth) is Thy hip; Bhuva (sky) is Thy navel; Swarga (heaven) is Thy chest which is the abode of Indra.
grīvā mahastava mukhaṃ ca janastapastu
phālaṃ śirastava samastamayasya satyam |
evaṃ jaganmayatano jagadāśritaira-
pyanyairnibaddhavapuṣe bhagavannamaste ||3||
grīvā maha: - tava	Thy neck is Maharloka
mukhaṃ ca jana: -	and face is Janaloka
tapa: - tu phālaṃ	Tapoloka, indeed, is forehead
śira: -	head
tava samastamayasya	of Thee who are everything
satyam	is Satyaloka
evaṃ	in this manner
jaganmayatano	whose body is the universe!
jagadāśritai:-api-anyai:	of all other things forming the universe
nibaddhavapuṣe	whose body is conceived as being made up of
bhagavan nama: - te	O Lord! Salutations to Thee!
O Lord! Thy body is the whole universe. Maharloka is Thy neck. Janaloka is Thy face. Tapoloka is Thy forehead. Satyaloka is Thy head. Of all the other things of which the universe is made, Thy body is also conceived of being made up of all that. O Lord! salutations to Thee.
tvadbrahmarandhrapadamīśvara viśvakanda
chandāṃsi keśava ghanāstava keśapāśā: |
ullāsicilliyugalaṃ druhiṇasya gehaṃ
pakṣmāṇi rātridivasau savitā ca netrai ||4||
tvat-brahmarandhrapadam-	Thy Brahmarandhra area (the psychic orifice on the crown of the head)
īśvara viśvakanda	O Lord! Thou the source of the universe!
chndāṃsi	(are) the Vedas
keśava	O Keshava!
ghanā: tava keśapāśā:	the dark clouds are Thy locks of hair
ullāsi-cilli-yugalaṃ	the delightful two eyebrows
druhiṇasya gehaṃ	are the abode of Brahma
pakṣmāṇi	the eyelashes
rātri-dibisau	are night and day
savitā ca netre	and the eyes are the Sun
O Lord! The very cause of the universe,O Keshava! Thy Brahmarandhra are the Vedas. The clouds are Thy beautiful locks of hair. The abode of Brahma are Thy two eyebrows.Thy eyelashes are the night and the day, and Thy eyes is the Sun.
niśśeṣaviśvaracanā ca kaṭākṣamokṣa:
karṇau diśo'śviyugalaṃ tava nāsike dve |
lobhatrape ca bhagavannadharottaroṣṭhau
tārāgaṇāśca daśanā: śamanaśca daṃṣṭrā ||5||
niśśeṣa-viśva-racanā ca	the creation of the whole universe
kaṭākṣa-mokṣa:	is by extending a glance of Thy eye
karṇau diśa: -	(Thy) ears are the directions (quarters)
aśviyugalam	the two Ashvinidevas
tava nāsike dve	are Thy two nostrils
lobhatrape ca	greed and modesty
bhagavan	O Lord!
adhara-uttara-oṣṭhau	(are Thy) lower and upper lips
tārā-gaṇā: - ca	and the galaxy of stars
daśanā:	are Thy teeth
śamana: ca daṃṣṭrā	the molars are Yama (the god of death)
O Lord! The whole of the creation is the extension of Thy one glance. The different directions are Thy ears. The Ashwini devataas are Thy two nostrils. Greed and modesty are Thy lower lip and the upper lip.The stars are Thy teeth, and Yama (death) is Thy molars.
māyā vilāsahasitaṃ śvasitaṃ samīro
jihvā jalaṃ vacanamīśa śakuntapaṅkti: |
siddhādaya: svaragaṇā mukharandhramagni-
rdevā bhujā: stanayugaṃ tava dharmadeva: ||6||
māyā	Maayaa (Thy cosmic creative power)
vilāsa-hasitaṃ	is (Thy) charming smile
śvasitaṃ samīra:	(Thy) breath is the wind
jihvā jalaṃ	(Thy) tongue is water
vacanam-	speech
īśa	O Lord !
śakunta-paṅkti	is the birds' chirping in formation
siddha-ādaya: svaragaṇā:	(Thy) voice is the Sidhdhaas (and other divine artists)
mukha-randhram-agni:-	(Thy) mouth is fire
devā bhujā:	(Thy) arms are the gods (Devaa)
stanayugaṃ tava dharmadeva:	Thy breasts is the Dharmadeva (the god of righteousness)
O Lord! Maayaa is Thy charming smile and Thy breath is the wind. Water is Thy tongue. The birds' chirpings, as they fly in formation, are Thy speech and Thy voice are the Sidhdhaas and divine artists. Fire is Thy mouth and the gods are Thy arms. Thy breasts are the Dharma devas.
pṛṣṭhaṃ tvadharma iha deva mana: sudhāṃśu -
ravyaktameva hṛdayaṃbujamambujākṣa |
kukṣi: samudranivahā vasanaṃ tu sandhye
śepha: prajāpatirasau vṛṣaṇau ca mitra: ||7||
pṛṣṭhaṃ tu-adharma	(Thy) back is Adharma (unrighteousness)
iha	of this (cosmic world)
deva	O Lord!
mana: sudhāṃśu: -	mind is the moon
avyaktam-eva	the unmanifest
hṛdaya-ambujam	(is Thy) heart lotus
ambujākṣa	O Lotus eyed One!
kukṣi: samudranivahā:	(Thy) abdomen is the ocean
vasanaṃ tu sandhye	(Thy) garments are the two sandhyaas (dawn and dusk)
śepha: prajāpati:-	(Thy) generative organ is Prajaapati (god of procreation)
asau vṛṣaṇau ca mitra:	and (Thy) testicles are god Mitra
O Lord! Adharma is Thy back and the moon is Thy mind. O lotus eyed One! The unmanifest is Thy heart lotus and the oceans are Thy abdomen. The sandhyaas are Thy garments , Prajaapati is Thy generative organ and Thy testicles is god Mitra.
śroṇīsthalaṃ mṛgagaṇā: padayornakhāste
hastyuṣṭrasaindhavamukhā gamanaṃ tu kāla: |
viprādivarṇabhavanaṃ vadanābjabāhu-
cārūruyugmacaraṇaṃ karuṇāṃbudhe te ||8||
śroṇī: -sthalaṃ	(Thy) lower-back
mṛgagaṇā:	forms the animal world
padayo: - nakhā: - te	the nails of Thy feet
hasti-uṣṭra-saimdhava-mukhā:	are the animals like elephants, camels, horses etc.
gamanaṃ tu kāla:	(Thy) movement is Time
vipra-ādi-varṇa-bhavanaṃ	Brahmins and the other Varnas ensue from
vadana-ābja-bāhu-cāru-uru-yugma-caraṇaṃ	(Thy) lotus face,arms, charming thighs and feet
karuṇā-ambudhe te	of Thee, O Ocean of mercy
O Ocean of mercy! The animal world is Thy lower-back and the elephants camels and horses are the nails of Thy feet. Time is Thy movement. The four varnas -Brahmins, Kshatriyaa, Vaishyaa and Shoodraas originated from Thy lotus face, hands, charming thighs and feet, respectively.
saṃsāracakramayi cakradhara kriyāste
vīryaṃ mahāsuragaṇo'sthikulāni śailā: |
nāḍyassaritsamudayastaravaśca roma
jīyādidaṃ vapuranirvacanīyamīśa ||9||
saṃsāra-cakram-	the wheel of Samsaara ( the cycle of birth and death)
ayi cakradhara	O Thou wielder of the discus!
kriyā: -te	is Thy activity
vīryaṃ mahā-asura-gaṇa: -	(Thy) prowess is the host of powerful Asuraas
asthi-kulāni śailā:	(Thy) bones are the mountains
nāḍya: -sarit-samudaya: -	(Thy) blood vessels are the many rivers
tarava: -ca roma	and the trees are Thy hair
jīyāt-	May it always shine (in me)
idaṃ vapu: -anirvacanīyam-	this indescribable form
īśa	O Lord!
O Thou wielder of the discus! Thy activity is the wheel of Samsaara and the host of Asuras are Thy prowess.The mountains are Thy bones, the many rivers are Thy blood streams and the trees are Thy hair. May this indescribable form always shine in me.
īdṛgjaganmayavapustava karmabhājāṃ
karmāvasānasamaye smaraṇīyamāhu: |
tasyāntarātmavapuṣe vimalātmane te
vātālayādhipa namo'stu nirundhi rogān ||10||
īdṛk-jaganmaya-vapu: - tava	such cosmic (Viraat) form of Thee
karmabhājāṃ	by all human beings (who are subject to the law of Karma)
karma-avasāna-samaye	at the end of all vedic karmas and at the time of death
smaraṇīyam-āhu:	should be remembered, it is said
tasya-antara-ātma-vapuṣe	(Thou) who are the Indweller of that Viraat form
vimalātmane te	(and) Thou who are of the nature of pure Sattva
vātālayādhipa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
nama: -astu	my salutations be to Thee
nirundhi rogān	may my ailments be eradicated
Human beings who are bound by the law of Karma should remember this Viraat (cosmic) form of Thine, which is of the nature of pure Sattva, at the end of all rituals, and when desirous of liberation and at the time of death. O Lord of Guruvaayur! My salutations to Thee. Please eradicate my ailments.